Proposal - Inferring @Sendable for methods and key path literals (#2139)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/nnnn-inferring-senable-for-methods.md

```
protocol P: Sendable {
  init()
}

func g<T>(_ f: @escaping @Sendable (T) -> (() -> Void)) where T: P {
  Task {
    let instance = T()
    f(instance)()
  }
}
```

Now let’s call our method and pass our struct type `S` . First we should make `S` conform to Sendable, which we can do by making `S` conform to our new Sendable type `P` . 

This should make `S` and its methods Sendable as well. However, when we pass our unapplied function `S.f`  to our generic function `g`, we get a warning that `S.f` is not Sendable as `g()` is expecting.  

```
struct S: P {
  func f() { ... }
}

g(S.f) // Converting non-sendable function value to '@Sendable (S) -> (() -> Void)' may introduce data races
```

We can work around this by wrapping our unapplied function in a Sendable closure.  

```
// S.f($0) == S.f()
g({ @Sendable **in** S.f($0) })
```

This is a lot of churn to get the expected behavior. The compiler should preserve `@Sendable` in the type signature instead.

## Proposed solution

> We propose the compiler should automatically employ `@Sendable`  to functions that cannot capture non-Sendable states. This includes partially-applied and unapplied instance methods of `Sendable` types, as well as non-local functions. Additionally, it should be disallowed to utilize `@Sendable` on instance methods of non-`Sendable` types.

Reviewer: Tiny grammar fix: it needs to be either "apply `@Sendable` to" or something like "employ `@Sendable` on".
```suggestion
We propose the compiler should automatically apply `@Sendable`  to functions that cannot capture non-Sendable states. This includes partially-applied and unapplied instance methods of `Sendable` types, as well as non-local functions. Additionally, it should be disallowed to utilize `@Sendable` on instance methods of non-`Sendable` types.
```

```
// Pseudo-code declaration of a Nominal Type:
type NominalType {
  func method(ArgType) -> ReturnType { /* body of method */ }
}

// Can desugar to these two global functions:
func NominalType_method_partiallyAppliedTo(_ obj: NominalType) -> ((ArgType) -> ReturnType) {
  let inner = { [obj] (_ arg1: ArgType) -> ReturnType in
    return NominalType_method(obj, arg1)
  }
  return inner
}
// The actual method call
func NominalType_method(_ self: NominalType, _ arg1: ArgType) -> ReturnType {
  /* body of method */
}
```

Thus, the only way a partially-applied method can be `@Sendable` is if the `inner` closure were `@Sendable`, which is true if and only if the nominal type conforms to `Sendable`.

```
type NominalType : Sendable {
  func method(ArgType) -> ReturnType { /* body of method */ }
}
```

For example, by declaring the following type `Sendable`, the partial and unapplied function values of the type would have implied Sendability and the following code would compile with no errors.
```
struct User : Sendable {

>   func updatePassword (new: String, old:String) -> Bool {

Reviewer: Little style fixes:
```suggestion
  func updatePassword(new: String, old: String) -> Bool {
```

    /* update password*/ 
    return true
  }
}

> let unapplied: @Sendable (User) -> ((String, String) → Bool) = User.updatePassword // no error

Reviewer: I'm afraid you only got one of the two arrows!
```suggestion
let unapplied: @Sendable (User) -> ((String, String) -> Bool) = User.updatePassword // no error
```

Author: 😭

let partial: @Sendable (String, String) -> Bool = User().updatePassword // no error
```

## Detailed design

This proposal includes four changes to `Sendable` behavior.

The first two are what we just discussed regarding partial and unapplied methods.

```
struct User : Sendable {
  var address
  var password
  
  func changeAddress () {/*do work*/ }
}
```

1. The inference of `@Sendable` for unapplied references to methods of a Sendable type. 

```

> let unapplied : @Sendable (User) → ((String, String) → Void) = User.changeAddress // no error

Reviewer: First of all, there are some stray arrows to fix:
```suggestion
let unapplied : @Sendable (User) -> ((String, String) -> Void) = User.changeAddress // no error
```

However, I'm not sure if you've actually gotten the right rule here. It seems to me that (a) the unapplied method itself should always be `@Sendable`—whether or not the type is `Sendable`—because it doesn't capture any state, and (b) the partially applied method it returns should be `@Sendable` if the type is `Sendable`. That rule would look like this:
```suggestion
let unapplied : @Sendable (User) -> (@Sendable (String, String) -> Void) = User.changeAddress // no error
```

If you do go with this, it might make sense to reverse changes 1 and 2 so you can refer back to the partially-applied rule when talking about the result type of the unapplied method.

(As an aside, it might be helpful to also include a non-Sendable type in your examples and show how the new rules apply to it, to demonstrate how they're different.)

Author: Thinking about this.

Author: I see what you're saying.  Yes that is more correct. I've updated the implementation to reflect this. Will update the proposal as well.

```

2. The inference of `@Sendable` for partially-applied methods of a Sendable type.

```
let partial : @Sendable (String, String) → Void = User().changeAddress // no error
```

These two rules include partially applied and unapplied static methods but do not include partially applied or unapplied mutable methods. Unapplied references to mutable methods are not allowed in the language because they can lead to undefined behavior.  More details about this can be found in [SE-0042](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0042-flatten-method-types.md).

Next is:

3. The inference of `@Sendable`  when referencing non-local functions.

> Unlike closures, which retain the captured value, global functions can't capture any variables - because global variables are just referenced by the function without any ownership. With this in mind there is no reason not to make these `Sendable` by default. This change will also include static global functions.

Reviewer: Nit: There's no such thing as a "static global function".
```suggestion
Unlike closures, which retain the captured value, global functions and static methods can't capture any variables - because global and static variables are just referenced by the function without any ownership. With this in mind there is no reason not to make these `Sendable` by default.
```

Author: What if I remove mention of static methods here? This section is just about global functions. The first two rules are about methods so I think it's better to talk about static methods there.

```
func doWork() -> Int {
`  Int.random(in: 1..<42)`
}

> Task<Int, Never>.detached(priority: **nil**, operation: doWork) // Converting non-sendable function value to '@Sendable () async -> Void' may introduce data races

Reviewer: Removing nonfunctional Markdown:
```suggestion
Task<Int, Never>.detached(priority: nil, operation: doWork) // Converting non-sendable function value to '@Sendable () async -> Void' may introduce data races
```

```

Currently, trying to start a `Task` with the global function `doWork` will cause an error complaining that the function is not `Sendable`. This should compile with no issue.  

4. Prohibition of marking methods `@Sendable` when the type they belong to is not `@Sendable`.
```
    class C {
        var random: Int = 0 // random is mutable so `C` can't be checked sendable
        

>         @Sendable func generateN() async -> Int { //error: adding @Sendable to function of non-Senable type prohibited

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        @Sendable func generateN() async -> Int { //error: adding @Sendable to function of non-Sendable type prohibited
```

    let num = C()
    Task.detached {
       test(num)
    }
    test(num) // data-race
```

If we move the previous work we wanted to do into a class that stores the random number we generate as a mutable value, we could be introducing a data race by marking the function responsible for this work `@Sendable` . Doing this should be prohibited by the compiler.

Since `@Sendable` attribute will be automatically determined with this proposal, you will no longer have to explicitly write it on function and method declarations.

## Source compatibility

No impact.

## Effect on ABI stability

When you remove an explicit `@Sendable` from a method, the mangling of that method will change. Since `@Sendable` will now be inferred, if you choose to remove the explicit annotation to "adopt" the inference, you may need to consider the mangling change.

## Effect on API resilience

No effect on ABI stability. 

## Future Directions 

Accessors are not currently allowed to participate with the `@Sendable` system in this proposal. It would be straight-forward to allow getters to do so in a future proposal if there was demand for this.

## Alternatives Considered 

> Swift could forbid explicitly marking function declarations with the` @Sendable` attribute, since under this proposal there’s no longer any reason to do this.

Reviewer: Even in this alternative, there actually would still be a case where we'd allow `@Sendable` on function decls: local functions.
```suggestion
Swift could forbid explicitly marking non-local function declarations with the` @Sendable` attribute, since under this proposal there’s no longer any reason to do this.
```

Author: Can you explain a bit why we would we need to add @Sendable to local functions?

Author: chatted offline, @beccadax was referring to nested functions :) added the suggested change and updated proposal with an example
